% vim: set tw=78 tabstop=4 shiftwidth=4 aw ai:

\chapter{Introduction}
\label{chapter:intro}

\textit{``Make it run, then make it right, then make it fast.'' -- Kent Beck}

Among the myriad of inventions, discoveries and contributions to the
development of human civilization, the Internet stands out as one of the
most impressive and extraordinary. With only a few decades of existence, the
Internet has managed to provide the means for uniting the entire planet, for
ensuring access to knowledge, information and digital resources. The Internet
is also a catalyst for all major technological advances in many other fields
of study where researchers and engineers alike have been challenged to provide
better services, better connectivity, better user experience, better
performance and increased diversity.

The exploding evolution of the Internet had provided users everywhere with
higher and higher bandwidth. The similarly explosive evolution of computer
technology ensured faster CPUs, larger hard disks, more memory. As even fringe
users had access to a good quality resources, the need to easily interconnect
and share information became preeminent. Peer-to-Peer Systems thus filled the
vacuum technological space enabled by the ever progressing Internet
technology.

The BitTorrent protocol is, in this thesis author's opinion, an example of a
protocol that had been made to work, and then has been made to work right,
though, as every protocol, has its own downsides~\cite{bittorrent-trade-offs}.
Simple, yet powerful, BitTorrent shines when used for large content
distribution and has subsequently been adapted for other features such as
streaming~\cite{bittorrent-streaming}.

It is around the BitTorrent protocol that this thesis is centered around. Our
aim, as highlighted in the thesis, is to take the protocol, run measurements,
analyze it and make it better: make it faster, enhance its performance, its
usability, broaden its scope. We do not aim to fill every possible spot of
improvement, but rather signal relevant aspects to be taken into account to
ensure increased performance.

When involved in Peer-to-Peer systems, updates, enhancements and improvements
have to take into account the rules, diversity and particularities of such
systems. Carefully crafted experiments, sensible measurements, reasonable
conclusions, useful proposals are important components of research activities
in this domain.

The objective of this thesis is providing a series of improvements to
Peer-to-Peer systems at protocol level, either through updating and enhancing
existing protocols or designing and implementing new ones. Formal and
experimental evaluations are employed to provide arguments regarding the
advantages of these updates. Providing improvements is based on careful
trial deployment and analysis of Peer-to-Peer protocols. The use of testing
environments and the employment of measurements and evaluation techniques are
critical to the successful providing of protocol updates and improvements. As
a secondary objective, the thesis highlights the methods and mechanisms for
creating realistic, scalable and automated trial environments and the
approaches available for collecting, measuring and interpreting Peer-to-Peer
protocol parameters.

\section{Thesis Scope}
\label{sec:intro:scope}

In accordance with the stated objective of providing improvements and updates
to Peer-to-Peer systems (as also stated in the title), this thesis primarily
defines its scope in the field of Peer-to-Peer systems, with an overal view
present in Chapter~\ref{chapter:p2p-systems}. In particular, most of
the research and development of this work is centered around the BitTorrent
protocol, one of the most popular protocols in the Internet.

Motivated by the desire to provide new and useful updates to existing
applications and creating new ones, the approach employed is one that
carefully deploys and monitors Peer-to-Peer applications, collects protocol
parameters, puts them under scrutiny and analysis and provides the input
required for improvements, extensions and updates.

While multiple approaches may be considered for client, protocol, network and
swarm analysis, the approach chosen relies on low level information,
considered to be the basis of protocol parameters. We are not (directly)
concerned with the overall view of the Peer-to-Peer system, but rather with an
in depth view of the client behavior. Hook points in Peer-to-Peer client
implementations, client logging or network traffic analysis provide the means
to gather the valuable low level Peer-to-Peer protocol information.

Protocol messages contain valuable information such as client download rate,
client upload rate, number of connected peers, protocol events. These
parameters are analysed and conclusions are drawn allowing for protocol
improvements to be proposed, analyzed and then put to use. An important
approach is using collected parameters for comparison between various
implementations, protocols or behavior in diverse situations.

Protocol improvements may result in updates to existing protocols and
solutions as is the case with the tracker overlay presented in
Chapter~\ref{chapter:unified-tracker} or the design of a novel protocol as is
the case with the multiparty protocol implementation in the Linux kernel
detailed in Chapter~\ref{chapter:multiparty}.

\section{Contents}
\label{sec:intro:contents}

Thesis contents follow both a chronological order, when considering the work
employed, and a logical order as latter chapters rely on information presented
by former chapters. Forward and backward references are provided where
necessary, while always keeping an eye out for providing the initial
information in a previous chapter.

Chapter~\ref{chapter:p2p-systems} -- \textbf{Peer-to-Peer Systems} presents a
state of the art of Peer-to-Peer systems and implementations.

The backbone of most of the experiments and trials involved is the
virtualized network infrastructure and features presented in
Chapter~\ref{chapter:virt-infra}.

Chapter~\ref{chapter:proto-measure} is concerned with methods and approaches
of gathering information from Peer-to-Peer clients, parsing that information
in protocol parameters and subjecting it to analysis.

A first improvement to BitTorrent swarms is the design, implementation,
testing and evaluation of a novel protocol that allows swarm unification, as
described in Chapter~\ref{chapter:unified-tracker}.

Chapter~\ref{chapter:multiparty} presents the design and initial
implementation of a multiparty protocol in the Linux kernel.

The streaming part of this work and description of trials and results in the
local LivingLab are presented in Chapter~\ref{chapter:multimedia-dist}.

The last chapter (\textbf{Conclusion}) highlights the major contributions and
results of this work and also points out what should be undertaken in the near
future. It rounds up the scientific relevance of this work and sets the ground
for further actions on the explored directions.
